Blog post on debugging failing SSH connections (#90)
aiidateam/aiida-website: docs/news/posts/2025-04-04-debug-ssh.md

## The rising action

I validated my key to access Alps the other day and sent a routine job.
Everything was working fine until the next 24 hours had passed.
After another re-validation of my key (business as usual), it suddenly had become impossible to reconnect to Alps.
The `verdi computer test alps` command prompted the following message:

```
Error: paramiko.ssh_exception.SSHException: key cannot be used for signing
Error:
Error: Error connecting to 'daint.alps.cscs.ch' through SSH: [SshTransport] No existing session, connect_args were: {'username': 'iam', 'port': 22, 'look_for_keys': True, 'key_filename': '', 'timeout': 60, 'allow_agent': True, 'proxy_jump': '', 'proxy_command': 'ssh -i ~/.ssh/cscs-key iam@ela.cscs.ch /usr/bin/netcat daint.alps.cscs.ch 22', 'compress': True, 'gss_auth': False, 'gss_kex': False, 'gss_deleg_creds': False, 'gss_host': 'daint.alps.cscs.ch'}
[FAILED]: Error while trying to connect to the computer
```

Apparently, AiiDA could not find the right key anymore.

## The climax

Not knowing the exact origin of the problem, one evident attempt was to explicitly tell AiiDA where to find the key.

> It might have been looking for the one among many (yes, I have a conservative tendency to accumulate SSH keys) and picked the wrong one (no offense AiiDA, everybody can make mistakes).

Reviewer: nice joke, but shaky english, hard to get :smile:

Author: I think it's OK ^^

Can you spot the difference?
`ela.cscs.ch` for the `SSH Proxy jump`, but `Host ela` in my `~/.ssh/config`.

Finally, this issue could be fixed by explicitely designating also the `Host ela.cscs.ch` in the header (SSH allows a list of `Host`s):

```
Host ela, ela.cscs.ch
  Hostname ela.cscs.ch
  User <my-user>
  IdentityFile ~/.ssh/cscs-key

Host alps
  Hostname daint.alps.cscs.ch
  User <my-user>
  Proxyjump ela.cscs.ch
  Forwardagent yes
  IdentityFile ~/.ssh/cscs-key
  AddKeysToAgent yes
```

## The denouement

Since then, jobs run smoothly on Alps, **and** can be regularly checked while running using `verdi calcjob gotocomputer <pk>`.
Peace has returned to the land of AiiDA.

## Afterword (by the devs)

In summary, the following two problems occurred:

1. Due to changes in the local configuration of SSH keys, the correct one could not be identified automatically by AiiDA (using `paramiko`), which broke all communication of AiiDA with the HPC &rarr; This could be fixed by manually passing the correct absolute path to the key file.

> 2. A discrepancy between the host that was defined in the `~/.ssh/config` file (`ela`) and the host defined for the `ProxyJump` in AiiDA's computer configuration (`ela.cscs.ch`) led to a failure of the `gotocomputer` command &rarr; This could be fixed by modifying the `~/.ssh/config` file accordingly.

Reviewer: This seems to be very much a specific user experience, 
The issue is the use of nickname in the definition in config file:
```
Host ela.cscs.ch
  Hostname ela.cscs.ch
  ..
```
this could just be:
```
Hostname ela.cscs.ch
  ..
```

Author: Ah, nice point, I will add that as a footnote!

The occurrence of both issues in succession made this problem tricky to solve, and we hope this story is helpful if you ever find yourself encountering failures in the communication of AiiDA with a remote machine via SSH.

Lastly, we would like to provide some additional technical background information on this topic for the interested reader:
In AiiDA, the entity responsible for communication with the remote machine via SSH is the `SshTransport` plugin
(`src` [here](https://github.com/aiidateam/aiida-core/blob/660fec70ef43a64be7edae3c12f0a0fd5ef84349/src/aiida/transports/plugins/ssh.py)).
It follows the general `Transport` interface, and uses the [`paramiko`](https://github.com/paramiko/paramiko) SSH library.
Hence, AiiDA's SSH communication with a remote machine can differ from OS level `ssh` calls, which can lead to discrepancies.
As further explained in the blog post, the `verdi calcjob gotocomputer` command is somewhat of an odd one out, as it executes an OS `ssh` call, but uses configuration options from the AiiDA setup, rather than the `~/.ssh/config` file.
This showcases the problem of having more than one possible sources of truth.

> We are well aware of the issue, so to solve it, in the upcoming `AsyncSshTransport` plugin, intended to be realsed with the upcoming v2.7, the `~/.ssh/config` file is automatically parsed and the relevant options set in AiiDA.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are well aware of the issue, so to solve it, in the upcoming `AsyncSshTransport` plugin, intended to be released with the upcoming v2.7, the `~/.ssh/config` file could be automatically used as authentications instead of manual setting the parameters manually.
```

> This not only reduces the effort for the user while configuring a `Computer`, but it also reduces the number of possible errrors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This not only reduces the effort for the user while configuring a `Computer`, but it also reduces the number of possible errors.
```
